---
layout : post
title : "Card View in React Native"
date : 2018-12-21
categories : Technical/React-Native-series 
---

_Note : Haven't put up any introductory post on setting up React Native Environment, since there are a lot of 
references available for that already. Also I recommend going through the following repository, it has an all
expansive list of react-native study material : [Repo link](https://github.com/jondot/awesome-react-native)_

CardView, a very popular Material Design resembles a frame, and has a very elegant styling already coded up for itself. 
It is a very potent tool to use, when information of the same kind needs to be displayed somewhere in the application. 
If you want to know more about what the initial design is the [docs](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/support/v7/widget/CardView) serve as a good reference. 

To be able to use CardViews in your app, do the following, 

Initialize your project, 

	react-native init ProjectName

Then, add the third party modules using your default package manager, *demo for yarn given here * 
	
	yarn add react-native-elements 
	yarn add react-native-vector-icons
	react-native link react-native-vector-icons 

Note : Not adding react-native-vector-icons will result in the code not working, since Card Component requires that module
for the initial auto-generated code added during installation to work. 

Thereafter using a CardView is exactly similar to how a normal View would be used, 

Import it, 
	
	import {Card} from 'react-native-elements'

Wrap some content in it, 

	<Card>
		<Text> some text </Text>
		...
		..
		.
	</Card>

And whatever is wrapped gets displayed, we don't need to worry about the size of the card, it adjusts according to the 
content it has, although we need to careful of the fact that the screen size might not accomodate all the cards. Thus we 
wrap the overall Content within ScrollView, so that we can view everything there, 

However, there are two very common errors while using 

SrollView Child layout must be applied through .... error type : This happens because in ScrollView, we can't have styling 
done through the normal *style* option, instead we have to use : 
	
	contentContainerStyle = {styles.someStyle} 

ScrollView, does not crash, but it does not scroll either. In this case, generally adding one option to ScrollView styles 
component ( here someStyle in the styles Stylesheet ) makes the code work, 
	
	flexGrow : 1 

And that's it, you can have CardView's in your application that easily. 


The reference code for this post can be found [here](https://github.com/yashYRS/Learning_ReactNative/tree/master/CardViewDemo). Hope this helped!!
