---
layout : post
title : "Custom Camera in React Native"
date : 2018-12-19
categories : Technical/React-Native-series 
---

_Note : Haven't put up any introductory post on setting up React Native Environment, since there are a lot of 
references available for that already. Also I recommend going through the following repository, it has an all
expansive list of react-native study material : [Repo link](https://github.com/jondot/awesome-react-native)_

Since, the **Camera** component used here is an in-built component, provided by the expo class, using it doesn't require any kind
of external library installation. However, for using the Camera in Android , the app should have the necessary mandation to 
use the device's Camera. For the same, we use the **Permission** component provided by expo. Thus it needs to be imported as 
well. Also this Camera component, simply gives us the view of the camera itself, it does not involve using intents to use the 
default Camera App in a given android device. Thus every functionality of the camera, from mechanisms to click pictures, to 
deleting pictures, to flipping the camera needs to be done explicity through code. Again, the photos captured do not get 
saved themselves, they need to be save explicitly by connecting the **FileSystem** component, also they can be stored locally
as well, using any database mechanism. Here we use 'react-native-simple-store' which is a 3rd party module (thus needs to be 
added manually using package managers) , a wrapper for Async-Storage, 

Thus import statement includes 

	import {Permissions, Camera , FileSystem} from 'expo' ; 
	import 'react-native-simple-store'

For looking at the camera contents, we simply use <Camera></Camera> as we would use <Text> or <Button>, we style it 
appropriately, however the only difference is we use Modal View to embed the Camera view, and the advantage of using a 
modal view is the fact that we can actually set as to whether the Modal view is visible at some point, or whether it isn't.
It becomes really useful with Cameras, since we simulate opening and closing of the camera by manipulating the visibility 
of the container modal view. 

	<Modal
		animationType="slide"
		transparent={false}		
		visible={this.state.is_camera_visible}		// control visibility by a state variable...
		onRequestClose={() => { this.setState({ is_camera_visible: false }); 
	}}>

Now as a sub element, to this Modal, we could define views, which will have the Camera component, along with a few buttons, 
meant to serve different functionalities of the camera. The styling of the buttons, camera screen component can be modified 
to one's suiting and serve the customization. A sample is given below 

	<Camera style={/* style */} type={this.state.type} ref={ref => { this.camera = ref; }}>
		<View style={/* style for Body */}>
			<View style={/* style for Button */}>
				<Button {/* close camera */} />
				<Button {/* flip- camera */}/>
				<Button {/* capture-photo */}/>
			</View>
		</View>
	</Camera>

here, one important point that needs to be emphasized upon is the setting of the **this.camera** variable, we connect the 
Camera View component inside Modal, to the actual Camera using this, very reference. Thus playing around with these, we can 
even simultaneously use both the front and back cameras, also the **type** here signifies, whether the front or the rear 
camera is being used, therefore a state variable can be used to keep track of the current type, and changing to a different one, would involve, simply changing the state variable's content.

However, before using any of these functionalities, as said before permissions need to be sorted for Android Devices. A way 
of securing permissions is shown below : 

 	componentWillMount() {
    	Permissions.askAsync(Permissions.CAMERA).then((response) => {
      		this.setState({ has_camera_permission: response.status === 'granted' }); 
    	});
  	}

componentWillMount code, executes before any page has been rendered, thus including this, would invoke an alert, asking for 
permissions to use the Camera. Here a state variable, has_camera_permission is used to store whether or not permission has 
been availed, so the button to launch the camera can use this status as a condition, to open up camera, only if 
status == granted.

The code to take a picture is given below : 

	if(this.camera){ // check whether there's a camera reference
		this.camera.takePictureAsync().then((data) => {
			// code for processing the picture captured, stored in data... 
		});
	}

Now, we have to store the pictures that have been captured, using FileSystem another component for which expo provides support
Importing the component is necessary as indicated before, we use a variable to store the location of the directory in which 
all the photos captured will get stored. Here we use *react-native-simple-store* in conjunction with *FileSystem* component 
to store the pictures in the app itself. 

	this.location = FileSystem.documentDirectory ; 

Here *location* will now have a unique location at which it is being stored, however it won't be accessible by the phone 
itself, since by default the location is in the Android OS. For changing this to save things to your Gallery, or to change it 
up to have things saved up on some other default location [Camera Roll API](https://facebook.github.io/react-native/docs/cameraroll.html#savetocameraroll) can be used. 

Thus inside the *then* construct for the code to capture pictures, we put in mechanisms to store the photo. The photo is 
accessible via the *data* variable. For every photo we get a unique *file-path*, then we add the following : 

	FileSystem.moveAsync({
		from: data.uri,
		to: file_path
	}).then( (response) => {

		let photo_data = {
			key: // some key 
            name: // some name 
		};
		store.push('database_name', photo_data);
	});

This function simply moves the photo from the obscure location it is at, to a location somewhere either local or external 
(in that case, we have to take permission to access device content's as well) in the app. *photo_data* here is used as a 
temporary variable to eventually store the photo in a database (Async Storage) for the app. So at a later point in time, we 
can view the photo by retrieving it using the key that was used to store it in the first place. A lot more can be done, in 
terms of enhancing functionalities of the camera, styling the app, some other 3rd party modules can be used that aren't 
supported by expo, and thus projects for those can be made using 'react-native init'. However, using expo components always 
holds the advantage of not having to install external packages, also there not being any effort whatsover to make changes 
specific to any particular platform ( neither Android nor IOS ). 


The reference code for this post can be found [here](https://github.com/yashYRS/Learning_ReactNative/tree/master/Camerademo) Hope this helped!! 