---
layout : post
title : "Map Integration in React Native"
date : 2018-12-26
categories : Technical/React-Native-series 
---

_Note : Haven't put up any introductory post on setting up React Native Environment, since there are a lot of 
references available for that already. Also I recommend going through the following repository, it has an all
expansive list of react-native study material : [Repo link](https://github.com/jondot/awesome-react-native)_

This post serves as an introduction to integrating Maps in apps, before starting out

Initialize your project, 

	react-native init ProjectName

Then, add the third party modules using your default package manager, *demo for yarn given here * 
	
	yarn add react-native-elements 
	yarn add react-native-vector-icons
	react-native link react-native-vector-icons 
	yarn add react-native-maps
	react-native link react-native-maps


Note : Not adding react-native-vector-icons will result in the code not working, since Card Component requires that module
for the initial auto-generated code added during installation to work. 

Now, for using any Map Service ( eg. Google Maps, OpenLayers, TomTom ) we need to generate API keys to render the Map View. 
Thus after generating the appropriate keys, we add it to our Android.manifest file as follows *demo for google API given*

```html 
      <meta-data
        android:name="com.google.android.geo.API_KEY"
        android:value="---- Insert your own key ----"/>
```
A common error that occurs on running the application at this very instance is as follows, **android.support.v4.accessibilityservice.AccessibilityServiceInfoCompat Error** 

A solution for this is to replace the line 

		compile/implementation project('react-native-maps')

with the following code segments, 
        
		compile(project(':react-native-maps')) {
			exclude group: 'com.android.support'
			exclude module: 'appcompat-v7'
			exclude module: 'support-v4'
		}

Now, hereupon we can render the MapView anywhere in the application. It is generally better to render the map with absolute 
coordinates, an example of a scheme for full screen map shown here :- 

	map: {
		position:'absolute',
		top:0,
		left:0,
		right:0,
		bottom:0,
 	},

However before using rendering the Map, we need to import all required components, 
	
	import MapView, {Marker} from 'react-native-elements' 

MapView has a *Region* variable, which has in 4 parameters viz, latitude, longititude, latitudeDelta , longitudeDelta to specify what area the MapView should be showing. 

Initial Region for the Map should always be shown, a sample setup is shown here, 
	
	<MapView
		ref ="Mapfunction"
		style={styles.map}
		initialRegion={{
			latitude: 37.78825,
			longitude: -122.4324,
			latitudeDelta: 0.00922,
			longitudeDelta: 0.00421,
		}}
	>
		<Marker
			ref = "MapMove"
			coordinate={{
				latitude : 37.78825,
				longitude : -122.4324,
			}}
		/>		
	</MapView>

**ref** is used to call the methods native to a particular component. Thus, for example for a button focus, blur methods are 
provided. So using ref, we create a object like entity which we used to call that method. So here, using any method for the 
MapView would involve the following, **this.refs.Mapfunction.methodToCall**. 

Here, the above code renders the Map to be set to the region specified, with the center of the map being marked by the Marker 
component and the expanse of the map being the variables latitudeDelta and longitudeDelta.

Say, if we get the coordinates of a new location through some other means in our application, then we can change our MapView 
to refer to those coordinates and our marker to point to that very location in the following way, 

	this.refs.Mapfunction.animateToRegion( {
			latitude : Number(this.state.latitude),
			longitude : Number(this.state.longitude),
			latitudeDelta : 0.00922,
			longitudeDelta: 0.00421,
		},
        100 
	); 
    this.refs.MapMove.animateMarkerToCoordinate( {
			latitude : Number(this.state.latitude),
			longitude : Number(this.state.longitude),      
		},
		100
	) ; 

The ref variables are in line with what we had set while rendering the components, also we assume the new latitude and 
longitude values are stored in state component of the application. There are a lot many other things that can be done with 
rendering of maps, and a look at [docs](https://github.com/react-native-community/react-native-maps/tree/master/docs) would be worthwhile. 

Geocoding is the process of converting human readable addresses to latitudes and longitudes, thus while searching for some 
location, Geocoding comes into place, since the user would be putting in the name of the addresses, and thus we need to 
generate the corresponding geocoded values, for any further application, example getting the route. 

Thus, for doing the same, we need to add one more package to our project, 

	yarn add react-native-geocoding
	react-native link react-native-geocoding

Thereafter we add another API key to our application, one which is capable of doing geocoding. Thus amongst the Google API's 
the *Places* API suffices. Some other key could also be used. 

	import Geododer from 'react-native-geocoding'
	Geocoder.init('---- Insert your API key here ----- ')

Now, a sample conversion of a place's address to latitude and longitude is given here 

	Geocoder.from(this.state.sampleAddress)
	.then(json => {
		var location = json.results[0].geometry.location;
		console.log(location.lat); 
		console.log(location.lng); 
	})

Here, we get the 1st location result that we get, and retrieve that result's latitude and longitude. If all the results are 
needed, we can use the json.results[] area to access all the results. It should be noted that the scope of the 
location variable here is local, thus to access these values anywhere else, we must store these to some variables, and for 
doing the same, differing datatypes must be handled with extreme care. 

The reverse of this process called *reverse-geocoding* can also be used using the same third party module. To explore the 
same, [this](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-native-geocoding) provides a sample function.

Another thing worth exploring is the SearchBar component provided by 'react-native-elements'. Generally used in conjunction
with React Native Maps, it is a very efficient way to display the results of a search and to choose amongst the options. 

A sample code snippet, which is self explanatory is provided here, 

	<SearchBar 
		data = {some array component}
		containerStyle = {some stylesheet component}
		onChangeText= {some method }
		onSubmitEditing = {some method}
		placeholder="Type here ...."
	/>

Of course, it needs to be imported for it to work. Here the data component is the array where the search will be performed, 
and from which the results will be finally refined. Other components are self explanatory. For discovering other functions 
associated with the SearchBar component, [link](https://react-native-training.github.io/react-native-elements/docs/searchbar.html)

The reference code for this post can be found [here](https://github.com/yashYRS/Learning_ReactNative/tree/master/MapsDemo). Hope this helped!!
