---
layout : post
title : "Realm in React Native"
date : 2018-12-20
categories : Technical/React-Native-series 
---

_Note : Haven't put up any introductory post on setting up React Native Environment, since there are a lot of 
references available for that already. Also I recommend going through the following repository, it has an all
expansive list of react-native study material : [Repo link](https://github.com/jondot/awesome-react-native)_

Realm is not a database in a very traditional sense, since it cannot be used universally. It has been designed specifically 
for mobile devices, although it makes up for this disadvantage with substantially faster speed, and it's simplicity of design.
At the very heart of it, it uses JS objects which are dynamically mapped to a full, custom database engine. Extremely complex 
data models can be modelled using Realm, and is thus is a very popular local database choice for mobile applications. 	

For React Native, using Realm involves using a third party library, since expo doesnot work here. So, 
*create-react-native-app*  wont work.

Initially to set up the project, 

	react-native init ProjectName 

Then based on the package manager installed, we add the *realm* package. A demo for *yarn* is shown here. 

	yarn add realm 
	react-native link realm 

Now this isn't enough we need to make sure the following is present for the application to be able to run a Realm application.
If it's not, we add these lines manually. 

1) In the **settings.gradle** file : 
	
	include ':realm'
	project(':realm').projectDir = new File(rootProject.projectDir, '../node_modules/realm/android')

2) 	In the **android/app/build.gradle**, if gradle version < 3.0, then replace implementation with compile : 
	
	implementation project(':realm')

3) In **MainApplication.java** : 

	import io.realm.react.RealmReactPackage ; 

And inside the getPackage() function after MainReactPackage(), 
		
	new RealmReactPackage() ;

After making sure, these lines are present, we have completed the setup neccessary to use Realm in our Application. 

### Making a Schema
Making a schema is equivalent to designing the table structure in SQL. However, the functionality provided by Realm, enables
making even extremely complex schemas, very easy to design, since overall design is very similar to the object-oriented design.

	cont Xschema = {
		name : 'X',
		primaryKey : 'id',
		properties : {
			name : 'string',
			id : 'integer',
			birthday : 'date',
			achievements : 'achievement[]',
			death : 'date?',
		}
	}

Here, *name : 'X'* isn't the property of the network, it is instead serving the purpose of a alias. Thus, every Xschema object
will have the same name-alias, for referring. However, the *name* inside the *properties* block is a property of each object. 
There are a plethora of datatypes available. For looking at all the options, [docs](https://realm.io/docs/javascript/latest/). 
Now, there are a few things to note here, the properties are where we store the table elements, also we can use our own custom
datatypes, i.e. we could use embedded schemas in our design, to model extremely difficult situations extremely easily. 

Appending a **[]** at the end of some datatype implies that the entity is a list containing those datatypes variables, 
similarly  a **?** implies that using the parameter is optional. Again, there is a lot more options to make better schemas, 
and a look into the [docs](https://realm.io/docs/javascript/latest/) might prove worthwhile. 


### Insert a Schema 
The following code block can be used for inserting an entry in some table, in realm referred to as making a object of a schema

	realm.write( ()=>  {
		realm.create('X',{
			id : parseInt(this.state.id, 10) ,
			...
			..
			.
		}) ; 
	});

Thus, after opening the 'X' type schema, we create an object of that instance, the reference for which may or may not be 
saved, as per needs. It must be noted that the realm object needs to be passed, across the screens for it to be accessible 
everywhere, or the path to the same needs to be passed as props.

### Query a Schema

1. Simplest query , return all the objects of a particular schema. 
	
	a = realm.objects('X') 

2. Equivalent to a where clause, using filter. 
	
	a.filtered('condition1 AND condition2') ; 

where a is the collection of all objects of that particular schema, as said before. There are a lot of other options 
available as well. ( eg: sorted )

### Delete a Schema 
For deleting entities, we will need object references of everything we need to delete, thus we use the query function first 
to get those references, then we call the delete operation. An example - 
    
    realm.write(() => {
        a = realm.objects('employee').filtered('id =' + parseInt(this.state.id,10))
		if ( a.length > 0 ) {
			realm.delete(a) ; 
		}
    });


### Update a Schema 
Update is very similar to delete, we simply get the applications, and then we simply update using the object references, just 
as assignment to any other object is done. An example : 

    realm.write(() => {
        obj = realm.objects('employee').filtered('id =' + parseInt(this.state.id,10)) ; 
        for (i = 0 ; i < obj.length ; i++ ) {
            obj[i].param1 = some_variable ; 
            ...
            ..
            .
        }	


A very common error is to not handle the data types appropriately while trying to do any CRUD operation on the database, 
especially if the state variables are being used to change/update/insert values in the database. For eg: use parseInt(str,10) 
if the required type is Integer for a particular column in database. 
The reference code for this post can be found [here](https://github.com/yashYRS/Learning_ReactNative/tree/master/RealmDemo). Hope this helped!!


 
