For all those folks out there, just beginning to code one of the most herculean tasks appears to be to learn git. It sounds boring, and to most beginners even unnecessary. However let me clear this out at the very onset, version control is paramount in development of any project big or small, and you only realize how much you have missed git all your life, after using it first hand. Yep, it is a silent guardian, a watchful protector, and our Dark Knight in the development universe.  *Batman fan dummies, if it wasn't apparent already*. I will share 2 stories of mine, when the lack of having used version control hit me hard - 
The first instance was when we were participating in Microsoft's Code Fun Do. Before starting out, we had intended for 2 functionalities to be there,  we wanted to display the location of nearby hospitals, generate their contact numbers or email id whichever possible, so that it would help people in cases of emergency. The idea was to use Google's API to get the details of the hospitals. The second thing we wanted was that on clicking any item in the list generated, that particular hospital would be pinged with the location of where help is needed. Now we had been able to extract the hospital's locations, their contact numbers. We had a base, and the app was good enough for being considered a valid submission ( T-shirts were up for grabs, and as freshers it was a big deal to us). But we did the grave mistake of not using version control, since none of us had ever used git properly, much less heard of other tools. So we went on trying to develop the 2nd half of the project,but due to some bugs appearing, and a lot of changes already made to the project, we lost track, and could not even come back to the point of half completion, to make a valid submission. It was soul crushing at that point, to have worked so hard, sacrificed sleep, and not even be able to make a submission, but the lesson was learnt : **Learn Version Control ASAP.**
The second instance happened very recently. I had just begun my internship at a software company, and I was supposed tomake a demo project, covering all advanced aspects of mobile development with ReactNative, since the company was looking to transition from working individually for independent platforms, to a integrated solution. A lot of things that come very easy with Android Studio become a little difficult with React Native, so I was trudging along, slowly converting a seed Android project to one coded entirely using React-Native, and this time around I was experienced with using Git, so version control wasn't a problem. However one day, in a bid to wrap up work early, I forgot to commit something at the end of the day, and the next day, whilst installing a third party module for react ( react-native-camera module ), my build files got messed up, resulting in my application not even starting, and to my extreme frustration it took me a full day's work to get to a point where I already was 2 days ago. So, again folks, don't forget to commit your changes to your repositories no matter what. Every commit needn't add a definitive new feature always, minor bug fixes must be committed as soon as you fix them, even commit your changes, if you fix typos. So there's your second lesson : **Commit Your Changes**

All in all, don't postpond learning Git ( or any other Version Control System that you may deem fit ). At the very onset it does not look like a very potent tool, but as you go ahead, you will realize that it is invariably a part of every project that you make.