---
layout : post
title : "Musings about where we are headed"
date : 2018-12-06
tags : [reflections]
---

The past decade has seen an unprecedented surge in developments and advancements, comparable only to the Industrial Revolution of the 17th century—yet, remarkably, this progress has occurred without any groundbreaking discoveries or major scientific breakthroughs. The contributions of theoretical physics and chemistry have diminished significantly over the last 25 years. In these fields, most major advancements have been abstract and esoteric, such as proofs of concepts like teleportation or theories about alternate dimensions (e.g., string theory). These topics often elicit skepticism from the general public, who view them as obscure, far-fetched, and dogmatic. In stark contrast, technological advancements have been nothing short of staggering, permeating every aspect of life at an accelerating pace. The "Law of Accelerating Returns" suggests that the rate of technological change has always increased exponentially and will continue to do so. Studies predict that in the coming decade, we could achieve 100 times more than what was accomplished in the last decade—a notion that may be unsettling for those who long for stability and the "good old days."

This raises the question: Can times ever be simple again? The answer is likely rhetorical. Luxury is one of the most powerful addictions, and its withdrawal the most challenging. In the short term, people might adapt to changing circumstances and give up some comforts they've grown accustomed to, but in the long term, evolutionary biology makes it virtually impossible for us to revert to our former ways. While we might be able to withstand extreme temperatures today, our constant reliance on temperature control is gradually eroding our resilience. Similarly, the day may come when it is psychologically impossible to live without the internet. Other lost human abilities include weaker digestive systems, diminished hearing and sense of smell, reduced peripheral vision, and a significant decline in survival instincts. This is what troubles those in the tech field—not the fear of becoming obsolete, but the realization that every new device, service, or automated task contributes to the erosion of our ability to perform those tasks independently. This paradox dampens the spirits of a community whose primary goal has always been to make life easier for everyone.

The solution isn’t as simple as halting technological progress abruptly, which could lead to catastrophic consequences. It would be akin to trying to stay afloat instead of moving forward in the face of an oncoming wave. Doing nothing would only set us back, the very outcome we sought to avoid. So, what is the solution to this seemingly insurmountable challenge? In many ways, humanity is behaving like a teenager—paranoid about every decision, feeling helpless about a lack of control, and endlessly worrying about the future. But like teenagers, we eventually grow up, mature, and gain clarity. Perhaps if humanity takes more responsibility and approaches this period of rapid change with maturity, we might just weather the storm and emerge into a brighter, more beautiful dawn.