---
layout: post
title: A brief history of Me ;)
categories : About
---

My name is Yash Raj Sarrof. I graduated from from Manipal Institute of Technology majoring in Computer Science. I am currently working as a Machine Learning Engineer at [Glib](https://glib.ai/). I am part of the R&D team, and our primary focus is to bring out a semblance of structure to the myriad unstructured formats in which financial documents are generated.

Prior to this, I was an intern at Samsung R&D Bangalore, where I worked in the On-Device AI division on projects that aimed at improving user's interaction with screenshots. My role dabbled from training models for script identification, to data augmentation for text localization in screenshots.

Although I am fascinated with deep learning models and try to keep myself updated with the latest developments on it, my primary interest lies in research that approaches NLP problems from a linguistic standpoint. I wish to pursue my masters and hopefully a PhD as well in future, and contribute to the research community in a meaningful way. 

I strive to keep the posts non-redundant, although in the process end up writing sparingly. The structure of the blog is as follows - 

* **Projects:** posts about some of the projects that I have worked on
* **Thoughts:** personal stories and random thoughts that pop up in my head
* **CS articles:** things that I have learnt through my work, and want to share

Looking forward to suggestions, criticisms and possible collaborations.
