---
layout : post
title : "A guess about where we are headed"
date : 2018-12-06
categories : Thoughts
---

  There hasn't been such an outlandish spur of developments and advancements as in the past decade since perhaps the 17th 
Century when the industrial revolution happened, all so without any new major discovery and sans any new scientific 
breakthrough. The contribution of theoritical Physics and Chemistry, have become  extremely miniscule, in the last quarter of 
a century. All major advancements in the purest of fields have merely been shoddy proofs of abstract concepts including 
teleportation, tapping into alternate dimensions (cue - string theory) most of which when generally talked about with the 
general consensus never fail to invoke smirks at the apparent obscurity, far-fetchedness, and the dogmatic nature of the work 
being done. Compare that to the technological advancements that we have made, and you have a completly contrasting picture. 
The progress and extension of ideas has been staggering, with more and more growth in every aspect of living possible, 
leading to a time, where it has become practically impossible to point out even one activity, or field that hasn’t been 
touched by this phenomenon that we are witness to, and this pace is only increasing. Interestingly, there is something called 
the “Law of accelerating returns” which in its essence implies that the rate of technological change, always has and always 
will keep increasing exponentially. Studies show that in the coming decade, we are probably going to achieve a 100 times more 
than what we did in the last decade, and to people who like stability, and love to reminisce about the good old days, this is 
not a very pleasant pill to swallow. 

  So the question that remains to be asked is that can times ever be simple again, and I guess the answer to that is as 
rhetoric as it gets. Luxury is one of the most powerful drugs, and perhaps demands the most difficult rehab ever. In a short 
term, perhaps people might even adapt to varying circumstances, and give up a few things that they had gotten used to, but in 
the long term, mother earth has other plans for us, with the damned biological evolution making it virtually impossible for 
people to go back to what they were. Today, we might be able to withstand extreme heat and cold conditions, but with being 
continuosly used to temperature control all around us, our limits will continually decrease, likewise it might even get 
psychologically impossible for us after a point in time to live without the internet. Some lost human abilities include 
weaker digestive systems, hearing, and sense of smell, an almost non-existent peripheral vision, not to mention massive
decline in our survival instincts. And that is what troubles people in the tech field, not the fact that they wouldn't ever 
be needed in the future, with them reaching an ultimate exhaustion point of adding layers to a theoritical basis. Every 
device that is being made, every new service that is being provided, every task that is being automated, is in a way 
contributing to us not needing to do that work on our own ever again, and thus eventually resulting with us losing out on the 
ability to do it at all, and this serves as a massive dampener to the spirits of a community, whose only aim there ever has 
been, is to make life in this world easier for one and all. 

  And the solution isn’t as banal as just stopping this marauding juggernaut all of a sudden, which in itself could lead to 
catastrophic circumstances. It would be the equivalent of deciding to stay afloat instead of moving forward at the sight of 
an imminent gushing wave. Standing down, not even giving a try would only push us backwards, a consequence that we had set 
out to avoid in the first place. So, what then could be the solution to this seemingly insurmountable conundrum; well in many 
ways, humanity is currently behaving like a teen, getting paranoid about every other decision they are making, feeling 
helpless over the fact that they have no control whatsoever, tirelessly thinking about what the future holds for them for 
hours on end. But the thing with being a teen is that we eventually grow up, mature and get our heads set straight and maybe, 
just maybe if humanity starts claiming more responsibility, starts growing up a little, we might just weather the storm, get 
through this rought night and hopefully leave behind yet another inspirational story for the kids, to follow. 