---
layout : "post"
title : "Tryst with Version Control"
date : 2018-12-07
categories : Thoughts
---

For everyone who starts out with coding, one of the most herculean tasks appears to be to learn **git**. It sounds boring, and to some even unnecessary. However let me clear this out at the very onset, version control is paramount in development of any project big or small, and you only realize how much you have missed git all your life, after using it first hand. Yep, it is a silent guardian, a watchful protector, and our Dark Knight in the development universe.  *Just had to get a batman reference somewhere in my blog*. I will share a few instances when the lack of having used version control proved costly for me  - 

The first instance was when I was participating in Microsoft's Code Fun Do somewhere around December 2016, when I was a complete novice. The intention was to build an application that could display the location of nearby hospitals, generate their contact numbers or email id whichever possible, so that it would help people in cases of emergency. The idea was to use Google's API to get the details of the hospitals. As an additional feature, we wanted the capability of pinging the nearest hospital with vacancy with the location of where help was required, (similar to how fire stations operate). Now our team had been able to extract the hospital's locations, their contact numbers. We had a base, and the app was good enough for being considered a valid submission ( T-shirts were up for grabs, and as freshers it was a big deal to us). But we did the grave mistake of not using version control, since none of us had ever used git properly, much less heard of other tools. So we went on trying to develop the 2nd half of the project,but due to some inevitable bugs appearing, and the host of changes made to the project, we lost track, and could not even come back to the point of half completion, to make a valid submission. It was soul crushing at that point, to have worked so hard, sacrificed sleep, and not having been able to make a submission, but the lesson was learnt.

Another instance happened during my internship at Optimize IT Systems around winter 2018, and I was supposed tomake a demo project, covering all advanced aspects of mobile development with ReactNative, since the company was looking to transition from working individually for independent platforms, to a integrated solution. A lot of things that come very easy with Android Studio become a little difficult with React Native, so I was trudging along, slowly converting a seed Android project to one coded entirely using React-Native, and this time around I was experienced with using Git, so version control wasn't a problem. However one day, in a bid to wrap up work early, I forgot to commit something at the end of the day, and the next day, whilst installing a third party module for react, my build files got messed up, resulting in my application not even starting. To my extreme frustration it took me a full day's work to get to a point where I already was 2 days ago. Post that, I have never ever made the mistake of not committing my changes ever again. I realized that every commit needn't add a definitive new feature, minor bug fixes should be committed as well. \*


All in all, don't postpond learning Git ( or any other Version Control System that you may deem fit ). At the very onset it does not look like a very potent tool, but as you go ahead, you will realize that it is invariably a part of every project that you make.

\*PS: Not so sure, about the commits that fix typos ;)